An eternal flame is a flame or torch that burns day and night for an indefinite period. The flame that burned constantly at Delphi was an archaic feature, "alien to the ordinary Greek temple". The eternal fire is a long-held tradition in many cultures and religions. It is a religious aspect of the Jewish Temple in Jerusalem, in which the Menorah, a seven branched candelabra, would burn continually. In Jewish tradition, the practice began when the Hebrew prophet Moses oversaw the construction of the original menorah for the Israelite Tabernacle. The concept was assimilated from Persian religions Zoroastrianism and later used into other Abrahamic religions as well. Judaism continues this tradition by having a Ner Tamid flame always lit above the Ark in the synagogue. An eternal flame constantly tended by a dedicated priest is also a feature of Zoroastrian religious culture that involved the Amesha Spenta Atar (Old Persian âdar, Middle Persian âtaxš). According to Greek and Persian accounts, three "Great Fires" existed in the Achaemenid era of Persian history, which are collectively the earliest evidence of the eternal flame. Most of eternal flames are ignited and tended by human on purpose, however there is some rare exception of eternal flame created as a natural phenomena. In Indonesia, the Mrapen village in Central Java is famous for its natural eternal flame created through geological phenomena; the leaking of natural gas from the ground and it was ignited by the fire a long time ago. The flame never extinguished although in the middle of rain and winds. In ancient times eternal flames were fueled by wood or olive oil; modern examples by a measured supply of propane or natural gas. Eternal flames are most often used as a symbol to acknowledge and remember a person or event of national significance, or a group of brave and noble people connected to some event, or a goal such as international peace. The eternal flame commemorating U.S. President John F. Kennedy following his assassination in 1963 was the first time that an individual known person was given such an honor (as opposed to an Unknown Soldier). Henceforward, eternal flames would be designated more frequently around the world to honor the loss of persons of great significance, in addition to major tragic and momentous events. Though it's worth noting that, in the Chinese tradition of ancestor veneration, it has long been common to keep an eternal flame in front of a spirit tablet in one's ancestral altar. Eternal flames exist in nature as well, as byproducts of natural gas deposits leaking through the ground. Similar phenomenon such as peat fires and coal seam fires can also burn for decades or centuries. Tomb of Carlos Fonseca in the Central Park of Managua.