Fan death is a widely held belief prevailing in South Korea that an electric fan left running overnight in a closed room can cause the death of those inside. Fans sold in Korea are equipped with a timer switch that turns them off after a set number of minutes, which users are frequently urged to set when going to sleep with a fan on. The Korea Consumer Protection Board (KCPB), a South Korean government-funded public agency, issued a consumer safety alert in 2006 warning that "asphyxiation from electric fans and air conditioners" was among South Korea's five most common seasonal summer accidents or injuries, according to data they collected. The KCPB published the following: If bodies are exposed to electric fans or air conditioners for too long, it causes  bodies to lose water and  hypothermia. If directly in contact with  a fan, this could lead to death from  increase of carbon dioxide saturation concentration  and decrease of oxygen concentration. The risks are higher for the elderly and patients with respiratory problems. From 2003  2005, a total of 20 cases were reported through the CISS involving asphyxiations caused by leaving electric fans and air conditioners on while sleeping. To prevent asphyxiation, timers should be set, wind direction should be rotated and doors should be left open. Despite warnings from the media and other agencies in South Korea, it seems it has never been explained by these organizations why this phenomenon has never been reported or ever heard of in any other country including North Korea. The genesis of this belief system in South Korea remains a mystery although there are some theories as to the origin. The most prevalent theory is that since the first reports of fan death didn't occur until the 1970's, it is speculated that in order to conserve energy use by the population, the South Korean government propagated this notion in order to cut down on energy usage at a time of supply constraints. The specifics behind belief in the myth of fan-death often offer several explanations for the precise mechanism by which the fan kills. However, as explained below, none of these beliefs stands up to logical or scientific scrutiny. Examples for possible justifications of belief in fan death are as follows: In summer, mainstream Korean news sources regularly report on cases of fan death. A typical example is this excerpt from the July 28, 1997, edition of The Korea Herald, an English-language newspaper: On Friday in eastern Seoul, a 16-year-old girl died from suffocation after she fell asleep in her room with an electric fan in motion. The death toll from fan-related incidents reached 10 during the past week. Medical experts say that this type of death occurs when one is exposed to electric fan breezes for long hours in a sealed area. "Excessive exposure to such a condition lowers one's temperature and hampers blood circulation. And it eventually leads to the paralysis of heart and lungs," says a medical expert. Gord Giesbrecht, a professor of thermophysiology at the University of Manitoba, is a leading expert on hypothermia: Dr. John Linton at Yonsei's Severance Hospital, who attended medical school at Yonsei University, is licensed to practice medicine in South Korea: Dr. Lee Yoon-song is a professor at Seoul National University's medical school and works with the school's Institute of Scientific Investigation. He has conducted autopsies on some of the people who have been described in Korean media as having succumbed to fan death: Dr. Laurence S. Kalkstein, Research Professor of Geography and Regional Studies at Miami University, however, has suggested that seniors may die from heart attack or stroke caused by the use of fans in an enclosed environment. JoongAng Ilbo quoted him who said:  Corrected link to Korea Consumer Agency Article: http://www.kca.go.kr/jsp/eng/news_01_view.jsp