The Geographical Association is a Sheffield, United Kingdom-based subject association with the core charitable objective of furthering the study, learning and teaching of geography. It is a lively community of practice with over a century of innovation behind it and an unrivalled understanding of geography teaching. The Geographical Association is wholly independent of state aid. Membership is an expression of support and helps the Geographical Association in its key mission to ensure geography continues to contribute effectively to the education of all children and young people. The Geographical Association is a registered charity (number 1135148) and its core activities are financed by membership subscriptions.The Geographical Association has approximately 6000 personal or institutional members. These include primary and secondary teachers, PGCE students, teacher educators, academics, geography students, infant, primary and secondary schools, colleges, universities, academies, libraries, societies, museums and businesses. Despite being a UK-based organisation, we have members in more than 60 countries and have strong links with geographical organisations in the USA, Australia and Europe. The Geographical Association was formed by five geographers, including Halford John Mackinder, in 1893 and remains an independent, unincorporated association. The first members got together to use and exchange lantern slides, a leading technology of the day. Today, the Geographical Association's purpose is the same - sharing ideas and learning from each other, using the best available technology. More information on the history of the association can be found in a publication called "The First Hundred Years: 1893-1993" A dedicated body of professional staff, based at our Sheffield headquarters, runs the GA under the leadership of its elected officers and appointed Chief Executive. The GA is overseen by two main committees, giving strong representation to the members. The Geographical Association is consciously taking steps to be inclusive and serve the needs of all teachers of geography, whatever the individual's particular enthusiasms. Its purpose is "to seek out, nurture and support excellence in geography teaching and ensure the education service understands the power of geography to serve educational goals. It aims to achieve this through a range of activities." Geography subject leadership: The Geographical Association develops geography subject leadership at all levels, from new teachers during their initial training, to geography co-ordinators in primary schools, to secondary heads of department Key geography resources: The Geographical Association publishes a wide range of resources from Early Years through to Post-16, including the popular Barnaby BearTM materials, primary and secondary Handbooks, SuperSchemes, KS3 and GCSE Toolkit series and Top Spec Geography. In addition, three professional journals are published for members on a termly basis - Primary Geography, Teaching Geography and Geography CPD events: Every year the Geographical Association runs an extensive programme of CPD events across the country, including the ever popular Annual Conference Campaigning for geography: The Geographical Association engages with policy makers and government ministers to constantly make the case for geography, with a heavy involvement in curriculum reviews and Government education consultations Funded projects: Over a number of years the Geographical Association has established itself as a leading force in the development of innovative geography projects in partnership with a variety of high-profile funders. Since 2006 the Geographical Association and RGS-IBG have jointly led the government funded Action Plan for Geography - further information is available below and on the Geography Teaching Today website. The Geographical Association, in conjunction with the Royal Geographical Society (RGS-IBG) has been awarded Government funding to support a range of projects as part of the Action Plan for Geography (APG) covering the period 2006-11. The APG's goal is: 'To provide everyone - opinion formers, policy makers, parents and pupils - with a clear vision of geography as a relevant, powerful, 21st century subject; and to equip teachers with the professional skills and support they need so that pupils enjoy and succeed in geography.' This recognises the need for well trained, up-to-date and enthusiastic teachers who understand and can use geography to help young people become confident in their learning, informed about the world around them, and responsible, productive, active citizens. 1. Balchin, W.J.V (1993) "The Geographical Association: the first hundred years" (GA, Sheffield) ISBN 0948512712