The Insular Mountains are a range of mountains in the Pacific Coast Ranges on the coast of British Columbia, Canada, comprising the Vancouver Island Ranges and Queen Charlotte Mountains. The Insular Mountains are rugged, particularly on Vancouver Island where peaks in Strathcona Provincial Park rise to elevations of more than 2000m (6,600&#160;ft). The highest of these mountains is Golden Hinde on Vancouver Island, which rises to 2,196.818&#160;m (7,207&#160;ft). Although the Coast Mountain Range is usually referred to as the westernmost range of the Pacific Cordillera (since it is the westernmost range on the main landmass at that point), the Insular Mountains are the true westernmost range. These Insular Mountains are not yet fully emerged above sea level, and Vancouver Island and the Haida Gwaii are just the higher elevations of the range, which was in fact fully exposed during the last ice age when the continental shelf in this area was a broad coastal plain. The Insular Mountains formed when a chain of active volcanic islands (the Insular Islands) collided against the North American continent during the Mid-Cretaceous time. The type of rocks that form the Insular Mountains are turbidites and pillow lavas. Granitic plutons seldom occur in the Insular Mountains, unlike the Coast Mountains. The Insular Mountain range covers some 133,879&#160;km² (51,691&#160;sq&#160;mi). It experiences frequent seismic activity, with the Pacific Plate and the Juan de Fuca Plate being subducted into the Earth's mantle. Large earthquakes have led to collapsing mountains, landslides and fissures. During the most recent ice age (some 18,000 years ago), ice enclosed nearly all of these mountains. Glaciers that ran down to the Pacific Ocean sharpened the valley faces and eroded their bottoms. These valleys were transformed into fjords when the ice melted and the sea level increased. Ice Age remnants may still be noted, such as the Comox Glacier in the Vancouver Island Ranges. The Elk River Mountains, located in Strathcona Provincial Park, are sometimes classified as a range.