Tumbler Ridge is a small town in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains in northeastern British Columbia, Canada, and a member municipality of the Peace River Regional District. The municipality, with its population of 2,454&#160;people, incorporates a townsite and a large area of mostly Crown Land. The housing and municipal infrastructure were built simultaneously in 1981 by the provincial government to service the coal industry. In 1981, a consortium of Japanese steel mills agreed to purchase 100 million tonnes of coal from two mining companies that were to operate the Quintette mine and the Bullmoose mine. Declining global coal prices after 1981, and weakening Asian markets in the late 1990s, made the town's future uncertain. When price reductions were forced onto the mines, the Quintette mine was closed in 2000 and the town lost about half its population. Since 2000 rising coal prices have led to the opening of new mines. After dinosaur footprints, fossils, and bones were discovered in the municipality, the Peace Region Paleontology Research Centre opened in 2003. Economic diversification has also occurred with oil and gas exploration, forestry, and recreational tourism. Nearby recreational destinations include numerous trails, mountains, waterfalls, snowmobiling areas and provincial parks. (more...) Recently featured: Harry Cobby – SS Edmund Fitzgerald – Edward VII From Wikipedia's newest content:   November 12: Birth of Bahá'u'lláh, a holy day in the Bahá'í Faith  More anniversaries: November 11 – November 12 – November 13 An artist's rendition of an Allosaurus fragilis with its jaws open fully, based on the research of paleontologist Robert T. Bakker. Allosaurus were active predators of large animals, and probably had the ability to open their jaws extremely wide. Studies suggest that they attacked prey open-mouthed, slashing flesh with their teeth, and tearing it away without splintering bones. Allosaurus was a genus of theropod dinosaurs that lived in the upper Jurassic period. Recently featured: Kohala, Hawaii – Friedrich Schiller – Impala with Red-billed Oxpeckers Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001&#160;(2001), it currently contains 3,794,027 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below.