The Monashee Mountains are a mountain range mostly in British Columbia, Canada, extending into the U.S. state of Washington. They stretch 530&#160;km (329&#160;mi) from north to south and 150&#160;km (93&#160;mi) from east to west. They are a subrange of the Columbia Mountains. They are limited on the eastern side by the Columbia River and Arrow Lakes, beyond which lie the Selkirk Mountains, and in the west by the upper North Thompson River and by the Interior Plateau on the west. The northern end of the range is at the southern end of the Robson Valley just south of the town of Valemount. The southern extremity of the range is in Washington State, where the Kettle River Range just down to the confluence of the Kettle River and the Columbia, and also farther west to the southern extremity of the Okanagan Highland (spelled Okanogan Highland in the US) just northeast of the confluence of the Okanogan River and Columbia at Pateros, Washington. The Okanagan Highland and parts of the Shuswap Highland, to the west of the main range, are technically classified as part of the Monashees, but may also be considered part of the Interior Plateau. The Okanagan Highland lies between the Kettle River and Okanagan Lake, south of the Shuswap River. Within this area is the small Sawtooth Range, which lies between the uppermost Shuswap River to the east and Mabel Lake to the west. The portion of the Shuswap Highland south of the North Thompson River, the boundary of which extends south to the Okanagan Highland, may also be included. Peaks include Hallam Peak (3,205&#160;m (10,515&#160;ft)) and Cranberry Mountain (2,872&#160;m (9,423&#160;ft)). Between Revelstoke and Shuswap Lake the range is crossed by Highway 1 - the Trans-Canada Highway - and by the mainline of the Canadian Pacific Railway, which both run through Eagle Pass. The Crowsnest Highway to the south takes the Bonanza Pass. The southern end of the Monashees within Canada is an historically important mining and formerly industrial area known as the Boundary Country, which is focussed around the basin of the lower Kettle River.