The Nexus One (codenamed HTC Passion) was Google's flagship smartphone manufactured by Taiwan's HTC Corporation. It became available on January 5, 2010 and uses the Android open source mobile operating system. Features of the phone include the ability to transcribe voice to text, an additional microphone for dynamic noise suppression, and voice guided turn-by-turn navigation to drivers. The device is sold SIM unlocked (not restricted to use on a single network provider). Google offered T-Mobile USA and AT&amp;T versions of the phone online in the United States before closing the online store in July 2010. A version for use on Vodafone (European) networks was announced on 26 April 2010, available in the UK on 30 April 2010. On March 16, 2010, the Nexus One device became available on the Google web store for sale in Canada for use with most Canadian carriers. In May 2010 Google announced the closing of the web store, with the intention to distribute the phone through partners around the world. The bootloader of the phone is unlockable, see below. Apple is targeting the Nexus One in a patent lawsuit against HTC. A trademark application for the name "Nexus One" was filed by Google, Inc. on December 10, 2009. The Nexus One trademark was filed in International Trademark Class 9 for "Computer &amp; Software Products &amp; Electrical &amp; Scientific Products" with description of "Mobile phones". On 15 March 2010 it was announced that the application had been declined due to the mark already being granted on December 30, 2008 to Integra Telecom. On December 12, 2009, Google confirmed in a blog post that they had begun internal testing of the device. Google stated that a "mobile lab device" had been given to its employees, at that time Google had not yet confirmed that a device would be sold to consumers. Wireless phone and data services for the device were not activated nor billed to Google; it was up to the employees to activate and pay for wireless service on their own. Isa Dick Hackett, daughter of Philip K. Dick, and several bloggers believe the name Nexus One is a reference to the novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? by Philip K. Dick, in which there are androids with a model designation of "Nexus-6". The Nexus One was released on January 5, 2010. The phone was sold via Google's website, at a price of $529 without a plan or contract, or a subsidized $179 when purchased with a T-Mobile USA two year contract. Google announced in May 2010 that the online store would close, and the phone would be offered in retail stores. As of July 21, 2010, the Nexus One is available through retail stores from i wireless and Cincinnati Bell. Several plans were available for subsidized phones: Unsubsidized phones had no such limitation. The $179 T-Mobile USA price is only for individuals who are not currently under contract with T-Mobile USA. If one currently has a T-Mobile USA contract, the price of the phone rises to $279.99. In addition, tax may be charged depending on the state to which the device is shipped. Each order is shipped with free FedEx Overnight shipping (although, when checking your order status with FedEX you may note that it was sent FedEx 2-Day), with indirect signature required. With engraving delivery can be delayed up to 72 hours. Google removed a price level of $379.99 for current T-mobile USA customers who had a data plan. Those who ordered the phone for $379.99 were refunded $100USD. T-Mobile USA contract plans cost $20 per month more than non-contract plans. For unlocked phones, T-Mobile USA offers a Prepaid SIM Card Activation Kit. T-Mobile USA's website offers it at discounted price of $6.99 (or free with a 2 year contract). Voice-only no-contract plans are available at several price points including $100 for 1000 minutes good for a year. Airtime is sold online, by phone, or at retail stores. On 18 Oct 2010, T-Mobile USA introduced a Data Day Pass which allows Prepaid users to purchase unlimited data access for 24 hours for $1.49. A version of the Nexus One with support for UMTS 850/1900/2100 MHz was first made available on March 16, 2010. (These UMTS bands are used by AT&amp;T in the U.S. and Rogers in Canada.) It was only available from the Google Phone Webstore unsubsidized for $529. This version remained SIM unlocked. When the Nexus One was first announced in January 2010, Google said that a Verizon model would be made available later in the year. But in late April 2010, Google announced that "We won't be selling a Nexus One with Verizon ...", and told users who wanted the Nexus One on Verizon to get the HTC Droid Incredible, "a powerful new Android phone and a cousin of the Nexus One that is similarly feature-packed." A Sprint version of the Nexus One (CDMA2000) was announced on March 17, 2010, without giving specific availability dates or pricing. The press release states a commitment to "simple" pricing and references the current pricing structure. On May 10, 2010 Sprint announced that it too, like Verizon, would not release the Nexus One, instead opting to release the more robust HTC EVO 4G in current 3G and expanding 4G markets. On March 16, 2010 Google officially released the Nexus One for purchase by Canadian consumers, offering two versions of the handset that will operate on either Bell, Telus or Rogers' 3G networks (UMTS band 2 and 5) or alternatively on Wind Mobile and Videotron (UMTS band 4/AWS). On September 9, 2010, Vidéotron included the Nexus One as part of their launch smartphone selection for its new AWS HSPA+ network. In November 2010, Mobilicity listed the "Nexus One by Google" on their "Products - Phones" web page. This is also on the AWS network. On May 18, 2010 the Nexus One was made available for purchase through the SFR web portal. Beginning set for May 25, the Nexus One availability was then postponed to May 28, 2010. The phone is sold over the Vodafone Italy shops and website. On July 2, 2010 the Nexus One was available for purchase through the Vodafone AUS website. The sale only lasted approximately 3 weeks as stock levels ordered were a minimum. The phone was also available through non telco resellers for use on any network. As of January 20, 2011, the Nexus One is still available for order from Vodafone NZ as an unlocked device for $979 outright, or $679 on a 2-year contract. Around Spring 2010, Google launched a Vodafone model in Europe, with plans to expand the phone to other carriers and international markets in due course. Google is making the phone available for delivery to the UK, Singapore, and Hong Kong, although native carrier tie-ups have not been finalized for these countries, and the phone will be shipped from the US. Customers ordering from the UK are charged $29.65 international shipping and an optional $19.00 for an extra AC adaptor, with an additional 17.5% VAT. Singapore applies 7% GST, while Hong Kong does not add any additional taxes. Although the Nexus One will not ship outside these countries for a few months, two French websites started selling it (with a carrier plan) on February 15, 2010. Phones ordered from Google in Singapore are currently being shipped from the US at the customers expense. On 26 April 2010, the Nexus One became available for pre-order on the Vodafone UK website. Contracts started from £35 per month with the phone showing as free. This was a first for Google, as customers need not order from the google.com/phone website. Vodafone predict initial orders started arriving on 3 May 2010, and the phone also became available for order in store from 30 April 2010. On 1 July 2010, Vodafone Australia announced that they would make the Nexus One available to its customers, first come first served, on the $79 cap across 24 months. On 10 July 2010, the Nexus One was launched in South Korea with KT as its service provider. First 4,000 pre-orders were started to be sent to respective customers, with 100 being picked to activate it on launch event held in 10th. The Nexus One will go on sale nationwide on 17 July 2010. Although the European, Australian and New Zealand Nexus One phones sold by Vodafone are not locked to the network of the provider, most of them are locked to a special Vodafone-specific system software, making it impossible to receive updates from Google. Vodafone UK are making 2.2 available as a FOTA update, as of the end of July 2010. At time of launch, the Nexus One had a 3.7&#160;inch AMOLED screen with PenTile matrix pixel arrangement. The raster resolution is 480x800 pixels, however each pixel in the PenTile RGBG display is represented by only two subpixels on average, using subpixel rendering rather than the three found in most displays, meeting the definition of WVGA according to the Video Electronics Standards Association specifications for measuring resolution. Citing supply shortages of AMOLED displays, HTC announced on July 26, 2010 that the Nexus One would begin using Super LCD display technology instead of AMOLED. The Super LCD display was described as having greater power efficiency and color accuracy than the AMOLED display, while sacrificing the lauded color saturation and deep blacks of the original display. As of January 15, 2011 or earlier, all Nexus Ones available via Brightstar, Google's worldwide distribution partner for Android development phones, shipped with Super LCD instead of AMOLED. The capacitive touchscreen which uses the Synaptics ClearPad 2000 sensor supports multi-touch gestures limited to single finger input and 2x1D two finger gestures. It has an illuminated trackball which can emit different colors of light based on the type of notification being received. A voice processor developed by Audience uses a second microphone (on the back) to suppress background noise during phone conversations. A 4-conductor TRRS style 3.5mm stereo headset jack is also provided, adding microphone and pause/resume/next/previous functions to the stereo earphones. The phone features a 5.0 megapixel auto-focus camera with LED flash and digital zoom, GPS receiver, Bluetooth 2.0, and 802.11b/g Wi-Fi abilities. The Snapdragon processor allows for many advanced abilities including 720p video playback. There is built in hardware decoding for H.263, H.264 and MPEG-4 video, and can play MP3, AAC+, Ogg Vorbis, WAV, and MIDI audio, and display JPEG, GIF, PNG, and BMP image formats. It has a micro USB port which conforms to the GSMA Universal Charging Solution instead of the common mini-USB port, or HTC's mini-USB compatible format (ExtUSB). The microSD card slot allows expansion up to 32 gigabytes of card storage. Applications can be installed either to the 512 MB internal flash memory, of which 190 MB are available for that purpose, or to the microSD card. A third party analysis by iSuppli estimates the cost of hardware components to be around $175. As of March 16, 2010, there are two versions of the Nexus One. Both versions of the Nexus One cover most major GSM and 3G providers in the US, Europe and Asia. On both phones, the GSM radio frequencies covered are 850 MHz, 900 MHz, 1800 MHz, and 1900 MHz. The original Nexus One (PB99100) also came along with UMTS frequency bands 1 (2100 MHz), 4 (1700 MHz), and 8 (900 MHz), allowing it to access 3G throughout Europe, as well as on T-Mobile USA and WIND Mobile and Mobilicity and Videotron in Canada. The second version of the Nexus One (PB99110) supports UMTS frequency bands 1 (2100 MHz), 2 (1900 MHz), and 5 (850 MHz), allowing it to access 3G in most of Europe, as well as on AT&amp;T Mobility in the USA and Rogers Wireless, Fido Solutions, Bell Mobility, and Telus Mobility in Canada. The second version of the Nexus One also works on Telecom New Zealand's XT Mobile Network, Telcel's 3G Network and Telstra's Next-G network. The UMTS radio supports High Speed Packet Access; HSDPA at 7.2 Mbit/s, and HSUPA at 2 Mbit/s. For More info on which Model of the Nexus One you have and the differences between the two please see this link. http://www.google.com/support/forum/p/android/thread?tid=395c29e6b9cab6bc&amp;hl=en The Nexus One was released with Android 2.1 Eclair. Later, an OTA update of Android 2.2 Froyo was released, which introduced a number of highlights: a new Home screen, support for Adobe Flash 10.1, better Microsoft Exchange support, Wi-Fi tethering, SD-card installable applications, cloud to device messaging for two-way push sync functionality and an overall 2-5x performance improvement. The integrated Media Gallery, developed by Cooliris, provides several new features allowing the user to browse, edit, and share photos and videos on the phone. The Nexus One ships with non-removable third-party foistware apps, including "Amazon MP3" and "Facebook". As of January 28, 2011, Android-based phones have access to more than 210,000 applications through the Android Market. The Nexus One OTA update to Gingerbread (2.3.3) started on 23rd February 2011. The Nexus One currently runs the Google Android 2.3.6 Gingerbread operating system. Google has stated it will not update the Nexus One to Android 4.0 (Ice Cream Sandwich) saying the hardware is “too old”, however, third party ROMs are expected. The Nexus One ships with an unlockable bootloader allowing developers to participate in the Android Open Source Project in addition to developing applications. The Nexus One operating system can be unlocked and flashed with the fastboot utility which is part of the Android Open Source Project. Fastboot runs on Linux, Mac OS, or Windows and accesses the Nexus One through the USB port. The bootloader of the Nexus One is accessed by holding the trackball while powering up the device. Users are able to gain root privileges on the device by unlocking its bootloader using the fastboot command "fastboot oem unlock." or by uploading specially crafted data packages via the Android debug bridge  without the need to unlock the bootloader. Unlocking the bootloader or rooting the device allows the user to install non-official firmware images. Additionally, obtaining root privileges enables a user to override protected operating system features, and install arbitrary software. If using the fastboot command to unlock the bootloader to gain root through use of a custom firmware image, the user is presented with a Google-created screen stating that unlocking the bootloader will void the warranty as well as void any insurance plan. The popular CyanogenMod build of Android has already been released for the device. Hidden menus can be accessed by dialling the following numbers: Though the multi-touch experience of the Nexus One is generally similar to that of other multi-touch enabled smartphones (iPhone, Palm Pre, etc), the Nexus One hardware uses software to "enable" multi-touch ability, resulting in x/y axis confusion and preventing some multi-touch applications (e.g. games) from working as they should, compared to other phones. As of an update released February 2, 2010 it has pinch-to-zoom functionality in the phone's Browser, Gallery and Maps applications. In addition to these official applications, 3rd party apps that support multi-touch gestures are available. HTC later released the HTC Desire, which has very similar specifications to the Nexus One. The Desire features an optical trackpad rather than a trackball, physical buttons rather than the touch sensitive buttons and an FM radio but lacks the noise cancelling dual microphones present in the Nexus One. The Desire is solely branded as HTC and runs HTC Sense rather than the stock version of Android. Sense can be switched off to get the stock Android experience however this was disabled on the retail HTC Desire. On July 16, 2010, Google announced that the next shipment of Nexus One smartphones would be the last to be sold on their web store, stating "While the global adoption of the Android platform has exceeded our expectations, the web store has not. It’s remained a niche channel for early adopters, but it’s clear that many customers like a hands-on experience before buying a phone." The device will continue to be sold through retail stores, and other channel partners. As of November 1, 2010 Google have closed the Nexus One support forums, redirecting users to the Google Mobile forum, which only has categories for software. The message shown to users was: "The Nexus One forum will be archived and become read-only on November 1st. Please see the Nexus One Terms of Sale for details regarding support. If you have questions about using applications on your Nexus One post them to the Google Mobile Forum." Also worthy of note is that the link to Terms of Sale on that message has no mention of support, contrary to what the message implies. As of the announcement of Android 4.0, Ice Cream Sandwich, HTC has announced that there will be no more software updates for the Nexus One, as the hardware is now too old to run the new version of Android effectively. According to Andy Rubin, the next Nexus series phone would have targeted business users and may have had a hardware keyboard. In July 2010, The Daily Telegraph reported in an interview with CEO Eric Schmidt that Google would not be releasing a follow up to the Nexus One. However, on November 11, 2010, Engadget leaked some pictures of a Samsung manufactured Nexus S device along with marketing materials from Best Buy and T-Mobile USA in the United States. Google officially announced the Nexus S on December 6, 2010. The device, built by Samsung, was the first to ship with Android OS version 2.3 "Gingerbread" and includes Near Field Communication (NFC) hardware.