Andrew Sharpless, CEO
James Simon, Executive Vice President and General Counsel
Michael Hirshfield, Senior Vice President, North America and Chief Scientist
Keith Addis, Board Chairman
Ted Danson, Founding Board Member
Xavier Pastor, Vice President, Europe
Susan Murray, Director, Pacific
Alex Muñoz, Vice President, South America, Oceana is the largest international ocean conservation and advocacy organization. Oceana works to protect and restore the world’s oceans through targeted policy campaigns. Oceana bases its policy campaign goals on science to achieve concrete and measurable results through targeted campaigns that combine policy advocacy, science, law, media, and public pressure to prevent collapse of fish populations, marine mammals, and other sea life caused by industrial fishing and pollution. Campaigns are designed to produce clear, identifiable policy changes within a 3-5 year timeframe. Oceana is headquartered in Washington, D.C. and has North American offices in New York, NY, Juneau, AK, Anchorage, AK, Portland, OR, Monterey, CA, Boston, MA and Los Angeles, CA. In Europe, Oceana has offices in Brussels, Belgium and Madrid, Spain. The South American office is in Santiago, Chile and the Central American office is in Belize City, Belize. Oceana was established in 2001 by a group of leading foundations—The Pew Charitable Trusts, Oak Foundation, Marisla Foundation (formerly Homeland Foundation), and the Turner Foundation. Those foundations had discovered through a study commissioned in 1999 that less than one-half of one percent of all resources spent by environmental non-profit groups in the United States went to ocean advocacy. Thus Oceana was created to identify practical solutions to the problems facing the oceans and to make those solutions happen. The organization was not started from scratch, as the Ocean Law Project—also initiated by The Pew Charitable Trusts—was absorbed into Oceana in 2001 as the Oceana’s legal arm. In 2002, Oceana merged with American Oceans Campaign, founded by actor/environmentalist Ted Danson, to more effectively address their common mission of protecting and restoring the world’s oceans. Danson remains a committed and active member of Oceana’s Board of Directors. In addition, after work by Oceana, in February 2009, the North Pacific Fishery Management Council voted to prevent the expansion of industrial fishing into all U.S. waters north of the Bering Strait for the foreseeable future to limit stress on ocean ecosystems in light of the dramatic impacts of global climate change in the Arctic. Oceana created the Ocean Heroes Award in 2009 to recognize the efforts of individuals who have demonstrated exceptional dedication to ocean conservation. Recipients of the award are announced annually on World Oceans Day, June 8th. The Ocean Heroes Award recognized one individual its inaugural year, but the award has since expanded to honor both an adult and a youth Ocean Hero. Actors Ted Danson and Sam Waterston are both on Oceana’s board of directors, but a variety of notable celebrities are supporters of the organization. Mad Men actress January Jones is the face of Oceana's "Scared for Sharks" campaign, and Private Practice star Kate Walsh filmed a PSA about sea turtles for Oceana. In 2010, Entourage actor Adrian Grenier swam with bluefin tuna and filmed a PSA about the endangered fish. In addition, U.S. swimmer Aaron Peirsol has led an open-water swim event for Oceana since 2007 called “The Race For the Oceans.” Other Oceana supporters include Ben Harper, Morgan Freeman, and End of the Line author Charles Clover.