Panoramio is a geolocation-oriented photo sharing website. Accepted photos uploaded to the site can be accessed as a layer in Google Earth and Google Maps, with new photos being added at the end of every month. The site's goal is to allow Google Earth users to learn more about a given area by viewing the photos that other users have taken at that place. The website is available in several languages. The headquarters of Panoramio are located in Zurich; in the office building of the Swiss Google. Panoramio was started in the summer of 2005 by Joaquín Cuenca Abela and Eduardo Manchón Aguilar, two Spanish entrepreneurs. It was officially launched on October 3, 2005, and by March 19, 2007, it had archived over 1 million user submitted photographs. Three months later, on June 27, 2007, the number of photos reached two million. After a further four months, on October 25, 2007, the number of archived photos reached five million. On May 30, 2007, Google announced plans to acquire the website, and Panoramio was acquired by Google in July 2007. Eduardo Manchón left the company in January 2010 to focus on his new project Askaro. He was replaced by Gerard Sanz Viñas. Joaquín Cuenca left the company in May 2010. Panoramio asks users to organize images using tags (a form of metadata), which allow searchers to find images concerning a certain topic such as place name or subject matter. Panoramio was also an early website to implement tag clouds, which provide access to images tagged with the most popular keywords. The website also hosts a list of world famous sites. Images that have (or are perceived to have) as their central subject people, machines, vehicles or anything within the interiors of structures, or depict public events such as fairs or concerts, are excluded from the GoogleEarth layer, as are any potentially controversial images. No waivers are granted even if the images are historical or otherwise vintage in nature. Images judged to be too creative or "artsy" in concept might also be excluded from GoogleEarth regardless of other requirements met. Users can create and join Google Groups. Photos can then be added to a group.  Panoramio allows photo contributors to choose the license type of their photos. Contributors choose to restrict all the rights as author or to share some of them using Creative Commons licenses. Panoramio has an official iPhone app and third party developers have released a Windows Phone 7 version of Panoramio that allows users to browse through the various images posted to www.panoramio.com