Sasken Communication Technologies Limited (formerly, Silicon Automation Systems, Inc. (SAS)) is a publicly traded (Stock) company based in Bangalore, India, and offers research and development consultancy, wireless software products, software services and network engineering services to semiconductor manufacturers, wireless handset developers, network equipment and test and measurement companies, and service providers globally. According to a Business Today survey, Sasken was ranked the second best company to work for in India in 2005 (rated first in 2004). Sasken Communication began as the brainchild of , its chairman and CEO and 3 other co-founders, Krishna Jhaveri, Suresh Dholakia, and Badru Agarwala. Sasken came into being as Silicon Automation Systems (SAS) in 1989 in a small warehouse in Fremont, California. Later the company's name was changed to Sasken Communication Technologies Limited. The name 'Sasken' is an amalgamation of its original name (SAS) and the Scottish word for knowledge, 'ken'. Sasken operates out of its headquarters in Bangalore. Besides its Global Development Center (called Fac-Z), it also has 2 other state of art development centers in Bangalore - at Bagmane Tech Park at C V Raman Nagara (also called Fac-B)and Adarsh Prime Projects on Outer Ring Road (Fac-A). Sasken also has development centers at Chennai (Fac-C), Pune (Fac-P) and Hyderabad. Most of its offices outside India handle sales operations. Since 2006, Sasken also has a global development center in Monterrey, Mexico (Fac-Mx). Sasken has offices at Bangalore, Pune, Chennai and Hyderabad in India, Kawasaki in Japan, Santa Clara, Plano and Burlington in USA, Monterrey in Mexico (2005), Saint-Laurent-du-Var in France, Frankfurt and Bochum in Germany and Guildford in UK. Apart from these, in September 2006, Sasken acquired 100% stake in Botnia Hightech(Now Sasken Finland) headquartered in Kaustinen, Finland, with other offices in Tampere, Oulu and Turku in Finland.On 24 January 07 Sasken entered into a Joint Venture with Tata Autocomp (A prominent member of Tata Group) known as TACO Sasken Automotive Electronics Pvt Ltd (TSAE). The JV focussed on automotive electronic products in the areas of telematics, infotainment and occupant convenience. The Joint Venture was closed in the year 2009. In October 2009, Sasken acquired the product portfolio, customers and the product development and sales team of US based Ingenient Technologies (Inc). named now as Sasken (Inc). With this, Sasken entered the league of global leaders in multimedia solutions and into the Consumer Electronics space.