Danny Sullivan is the editor-in-chief of Search Engine Land, a blog that covers news and information about search engines, and search marketing. Search Engine Land is owned by Third Door Media, of which Danny Sullivan is partner and chief content officer. Third Door Media also owns and operates other search related companies, including Search Marketing Now, which provides webcasts and webinars, both live and on demand, about web marketing; and Search Marketing Expo, a search engine marketing conference. Sullivan was born in 1965 and raised in Newport Beach, California. His name is Danny, not Daniel. He graduated from the University of California, Irvine and spent a year in England working for the BBC. He married his wife while there and moved back to California where he worked in the graphic design department and was a reporter for the Los Angeles Times and The Orange County Register. He got his start in technology when he helped found Maximized Online with programmer Ken Spreitzer. He then moved to Chitterne, a small village in England with his wife and two sons. His family recently returned to Newport Beach. Sullivan started Search Engine Watch in June 1997 after he posted research about search engines, called A Webmaster's Guide To Search Engines, in April 1996. Search Engine Watch was a website with tips on how to get good search engine results. Shortly after beginning in November that year, he sold it for an undisclosed amount to MecklerMedia (now Jupitermedia). He stayed on to maintain the site, and be the editor-in-chief. In 2006, it was sold to Incisive Media for $43 million. Search Engine Watch was considered by Matt Cutts of Google as "must reading", and Tim Mayer of Yahoo! as the "most authoritative source on search." He has also staged the Search Engine Strategies conference six times each year, attracting 1,500 to 6,000 attendees each time. On August 29, 2006, Sullivan announced he would be leaving Search Engine Watch on November 30, 2006, he later came to an agreement with Jupitermedia to continue participating in SES through 2007. Search Engine Land is a news web site that covers search engine marketing and search engine optimization. It was founded in 2006 by Sullivan after he left Search Engine Watch. Search Engine Land stories have been cited numerous times by other media outlets. Search Engine Land reports that it attracted 95,000 unique users in February, 2007, representing 15% of the world market for search advertising. This user group spends approximately US$1.5 billion per annum.