Sequoia Capital is a Californian venture capital firm located on Sand Hill Road in Menlo Park, California. The Wall Street Journal has called Sequoia Capital "one of the highest-caliber venture firms", and noted that it is "one of Silicon Valley's most influential venture-capital firms". The New York Times has called Sequoia "one of the top venture firms in the Valley" and has said that it is "among the most successful venture firms in Silicon Valley." The Washington Post has called Sequoia Capital "one of the pre-eminent venture capital firms in Silicon Valley." The firm is known for the companies it has funded, and it estimates that 19% of the NASDAQ’s value is made up of firms Sequoia has funded. Sequoia has funded companies including Apple, Aruba Networks, Google, YouTube, PayPal, Cisco Systems, Oracle, Electronic Arts, Yahoo!, NVIDIA, Navigenics, Cotendo, Atari, Ameritox, Kayak, Meebo, Admob, Zappos, Green Dot and LinkedIn. The firm has offices in the U.S., China, India and Israel. Sequoia invests in companies all over the world. Sequoia was founded by Don Valentine in 1972. The firm's partners include Don Valentine, Jake Anderson, Mickey Arabelovic, Roelof Botha, Scott Carter, Randy Ditzler, Michael Dixon, Jim Goetz, Michael Goguen, Gaurav Garg, Patrick Grady, Warren Hogarth, Mark Kvamme, Timothy Lee, Doug Leone, Alfred Lin, Greg McAdoo, Michael Moritz, Chris Olsen, Luis Robles, Bryan Schreier, David Spector, and Mark Stevens. Sequoia Capital is a private equity and venture capital firm specializing in incubation, seed stage, start-up stage, early stage, and growth stage investments in private companies. It also invests in public companies. The firm seeks to invest in all sectors with a focus on services including financial services, healthcare, Internet, outsourcing, retail, and wireless; mobile; technology; software including application, infrastructure, data management, and wireless; systems including networking, infrastructure, security, and wireless; components including semiconductors with a focus on analog and mixed signal, networking, multimedia, and programmable and wireless components; and energy including alternative energy, conventional energy, energy efficiency, energy storage, and energy services. The firm seeks to invest in companies based in the United States for early and seed stage investments. However, for growth stage investments, it does not limit its investments to any country. It invests between $100,000 and $1 million in seed stage, between $1 million and $10 million in early stage, and between $10 million and $100 million in growth stage. The firm prefers to be the first investor and business partner in a growth stage company. Sequoia Capital was founded in 1972 and is based in Menlo Park, California. Within financial services, it invests in banking, brokerage, payments, and enabling technology. Within healthcare, the firm invests across diagnostic services, genetics services, lab services, patient services, product development services, and enabling technology companies. Within Internet, it invests in advertising, communications, ecommerce, games, media, search, social networking, and enabling technology companies. Within the mobile sector, the firm invests in advertising, applications, devices and enabling technology companies. Within outsourcing, it invests across business process outsourcing, hosting services, managed services, professional services and software development services. Within technology, the firm invests in semiconductor, sub-systems, systems, software, and services companies. It also invests in optical components; computer, subsystems, and communication systems; and consumer and professional services. Sequoia Capital provided venture capital for the following companies: 