Sheryl Kara Sandberg (born August 28, 1969) is an American businesswoman. She is the current chief operating officer of Facebook. Prior to Facebook, Sheryl was Vice President of Global Online Sales and Operations at Google. She also was involved in launching Google's philanthropic arm Google.org. Prior to Google, Sandberg served as chief of staff for the United States Department of the Treasury. Sheryl Kara Sandberg was born in 1969 in Washington, D.C., United States, the daughter of Adele and Joel Sandberg and the oldest of three siblings. Her family moved to North Miami Beach, Florida when she was two years old. She attended public school, where she was "always at the top of her class." Sandberg taught aerobics in the 1980s while in high school. In 1987, Sandberg enrolled at Harvard College and in 1991, graduated with a A.B. in Economics and was awarded the John H. Williams Prize for the top graduating student in economics. While at Harvard, Sheryl met then professor Larry Summers who became her mentor and thesis adviser. Summers recruited her to be his research assistant at the World Bank, where she worked on health projects in India dealing with leprosy, AIDS, and blindness. She was inducted into the Phi Beta Kappa Society. In 1993, she enrolled at Harvard Business School and in 1995 she earned her M.B.A. with highest distinction . After business school, Sandberg worked as a management consultant for McKinsey &amp; Company. From 1996 to 2001, Sheryl served as Chief of Staff to then United States Secretary of the Treasury Larry Summers under President Bill Clinton where she helped lead the Treasury’s work on forgiving debt in the developing world during the Asian financial crisis. In late 2007, Mark Zuckerberg, co-founder and CEO of Facebook, met Sandberg at a Christmas party held by Dan Rosensweig; at the time, she was considering becoming a senior executive for the Washington Post Company. Zuckerberg had no formal search for a COO but thought of Sheryl as "a perfect fit" for this role. They spent more time together in January 2008 at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, and in March 2008 Facebook announced hiring Sheryl Sandberg away from Google. After joining the company, Sandberg quickly began trying to figure out how to make Facebook profitable, before she joined, the company was "primarily interested in building a really cool site; profits, they assumed, would follow." By late spring, Facebook's leadership had agreed to rely on advertising, "with the ads discreetly presented"; by 2010, Facebook became profitable. According to Facebook, Sandberg oversees the firm's business operations including sales, marketing, business development, human resources, public policy and communications. In 2004, Sandberg married David Goldberg. Goldberg later became CEO of SurveyMonkey. In 2009, Sandberg was named to the board of the Walt Disney Company. She also joined the Board of Directors of Starbucks which comes with a $280,000 annual salary. She also serves on the boards of the Brookings Institution, Women for Women International, V-Day, and the Ad Council. In 2008, she wrote an article for The Huffington Post in support of her mentor Larry Summers who was then under fire for his comments about women. In May 2011, Sandberg gave the Commencement Address at the Barnard College graduation ceremony. Sheryl Sandberg has been ranked one of the 50 "Most Powerful Women in Business" by Fortune Magazine since at least 2008. In 2007, she was ranked #29 and was the youngest woman on the list. In 2008, she was ranked #34. In 2009, Sheryl was #22 on 50 Most Powerful Women in Business by Fortune. And in 2010, Sheryl was #16 on 50 Most Powerful Women in Business by Fortune. In addition, in 2007, she was ranked #19 on 50 "Women to Watch" by The Wall Street Journal. She was ranked 21 on that list in 2008.. In 2011, she was ranked #5 on "the world's 100 most powerful women" by the forbes  Sheryl was also named one of the "25 Most Influential People on the Web" by Business Week.