Shirley Marie Tilghman, FRS (née Caldwell; born 17 September 1946) is a scholar in molecular biology and an academic administrator, the President of Princeton University. She is the first woman to hold the position and only the second female president in the Ivy League. A leader in the field of molecular biology, Tilghman was a member of the Princeton faculty for 15 years before being named president. Tilghman graduated from Kelvin High School in Winnipeg, Manitoba and received her Honours B.Sc. in chemistry from Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario, in 1968. After two years of secondary school teaching in Sierra Leone, West Africa, she obtained her Ph.D. in biochemistry from Temple University in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania under Richard W. Hanson. She married Joseph Tilghman in 1970. This marriage ended in the early 1980's, leaving Tilghman with custody of their young daughter (Rebecca) and infant son (Alex). She attributes her successful balancing of a scientific career and caring for her family to organization and focus. Her goal was to not feel guilty while at work or at home, instead focusing on the task at hand. Tilghman's work in molecular genetics focused on the regulation of genes during development, particularly in the field of genomic imprinting. During postdoctoral studies at the National Institutes of Health, Tilghman made a number of discoveries while a member of the team which cloned the first mammalian gene. She went on to demonstrate that the globin gene was spliced, a finding that helped confirm some of the revolutionary theories then emerging about gene behavior. She continued to make scientific breakthroughs as an independent investigator at the Institute for Cancer Research in Philadelphia and as an adjunct associate professor of Human Genetics at University of Pennsylvania. Tilghman went to Princeton University in 1986 as the Howard A. Prior Professor of the Life Sciences. Two years later, she also joined the Howard Hughes Medical Institute as an investigator. She was a leader in the use of mice to understand the behavior of genes by researching the effect of gene insertion in embryonic cells. In 1998, she took on additional responsibilities as the founding director of Princeton's multi-disciplinary Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, while continuing to study how male and female genomes are packaged and the consequences of the differences for regulating embryo growth. Tilghman succeeded Harold Shapiro and became the 19th President of Princeton University in 2001. She was elected Princeton's first woman president on May 5, 2001, and assumed office on June 15, 2001. Under her administration, the University built a sixth residential college, named in honor of alumna Meg Whitman, to accommodate an 11 percent expansion of the undergraduate student body (an increase of some 500 students), as recommended by a special committee of the Board of Trustees chaired by Paul M. Wythes. The establishment of Whitman College, together with the reconstruction of Butler College, accompanied a significant reconfiguration of Princeton’s residential college system, which now incorporates upperclassmen as well as freshmen and sophomores, providing new residential options and increasing opportunities for social interaction across the student body. In addition, an effort has been made to strengthen the relationship between the university and Princeton’s independent eating clubs, where most upperclassmen take their meals, with the goal of enhancing the undergraduate experience of all students. Tilghman has presided over a number of academic initiatives, including the creation of a Center for African American Studies, the Lewis Center for the Arts (after alumnus Peter B. Lewis), the Princeton Neuroscience Institute and the Andlinger Center for Energy and the Environment (after alumnus Gerhard R. Andlinger). Along with the renewal of the Department of Chemistry, these steps have both capitalized on Princeton’s existing strengths and broken new ground, ensuring that the university will, in Tilghman’s words, continue “to make the world a better place through the power of the mind and the imagination.”  More broadly, Tilghman’s presidency has placed an emphasis on increasing the diversity of Princeton’s faculty and students; widening access to the university through improvements to its generous financial aid program and the elimination of admission through “early decision”; fostering a multidisciplinary approach to teaching and research; and strengthening the university’s international perspective through a wide range of initiatives – from the Global Scholars Program, which brings international scholars to campus on a recurring basis, to the Bridge Year Program, which gives incoming freshmen an opportunity to defer their studies for a year in order to devote themselves to public service overseas. For Tilghman, Princeton has two essential missions. “One is to ensure that our doors are open as wide as possible to every talented student in the world who is capable of doing the hard work we ask of them. And that means maintaining our commitment to financial aid, which is the tool – the critical tool – to get those students to Princeton. And the second thing is that we must address the most critical issues, and push back the frontiers of knowledge, and not just in science and technology, but in social policy, and in public policy, and in understanding the nature of the human condition.”  Although President Tilghman has been accused of favoring women in her hiring practices, in fact, most of her appointees have been men. The women she has hired to senior positions include Amy Gutmann (who was chosen as the President of the University of Pennsylvania in early 2004) as Provost, the second-most-powerful administrative position in the University, Anne-Marie Slaughter as Dean of the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs as well as her successor Christina Paxson, Maria Klawe as Dean of the School of Engineering and Applied Science (chosen as the President of Harvey Mudd College in 2006), and Janet Lavin Rapelye as the Dean of Admission. Prominent men she has appointed include Charles Kalmbach as the Senior Vice President for Administration, the highest non-academic administrative post, David P. Dobkin as Dean of the Faculty, Gutmann's replacement Christopher L. Eisgruber, and Klawe's replacement H. Vincent Poor. Tilghman also signed on to the Ivy League-wide Seven-week athletic moratorium, in which intercollegiate athletes were enjoined from taking part in supervised practices and other obligatory athletic activities for seven weeks during the academic year in order to encourage them to participate in other activities. Supporters of the proposal pointed to studies by former Princeton president William G. Bowen, whose book The Game of Life described the widespread academic underperformance of college athletes. Detractors claimed that it represented an encroachment on students' freedom to use their time as they saw fit. While Tilghman has disquieted some alumni by promoting a more diverse university community, establishing a single admission process, and broadening the range of residential and dining options available to students, she has also found strong support for these actions and the vision that underpins them. Tilghman is a member of the American Philosophical Society, the National Academy of Sciences, the Institute of Medicine and the Royal Society of London. She was a founding member of the International Mammalian Genome Society. She serves as a trustee of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology. From 1993 through 2000, Tilghman chaired Princeton’s Council on Science and Technology, which encourages teaching science and technology to students outside the sciences. In 1996, she received Princeton’s President’s Award for Distinguished Teaching. Nineteen Princeton graduating classes, from 1941 to 2005, have made President Tilghman an honorary member. Tilghman has served as a member of the board of directors of Google since October 2005. As compensation for joining the board, she received 6,000 shares of stock that by 2005 were worth in excess of her Princeton compensation package that by 2003 had reached $533,057. She also serves on the Queen's Chemistry Innovation Council in order to help the development of the Chemistry program at Queen's. "What made it truly thrilling was that the genes were organized in a way that was totally unexpected. So nature took us by surprise." "There are 25 years of good social science that demonstrate the many cultural practices that act collectively to discourage women from entering and continuing careers in science and engineering. The research is overwhelming, and it is there for anybody to see. On the other hand, the data that would suggest there are innate differences in the abilities of men and women to succeed in the natural sciences are nonexistent." Dickinson&#160;• Burr&#160;• Edwards&#160;• Davies&#160;• Finley&#160;• Witherspoon&#160;• Smith&#160;• Green&#160;• Carnahan&#160;• Maclean&#160;• McCosh&#160;• Patton&#160;• Wilson&#160;• Hibben&#160;• Dodds&#160;• Goheen&#160;• Bowen&#160;• Shapiro&#160;• Tilghman Ruth Simmons (Brown)&#160;• Lee Bollinger (Columbia)&#160;• David J. Skorton (Cornell)&#160;• Jim Yong Kim (Dartmouth)&#160;• Drew Gilpin Faust (Harvard)&#160;• Shirley M. Tilghman (Penn)&#160;• Amy Gutmann (Princeton)&#160;• Rick Levin (Yale)