The HTC Dream (also marketed as the T-Mobile G1 in the US and parts of Europe and as the Era G1 in Poland) is an Internet-enabled smartphone with an operating system designed by Google and hardware designed by HTC. It was the first phone on the market to use the Android mobile device platform.. The HTC Dream was released in the US on 22 October 2008; in the UK on 30 October 2008;  and became available in other European countries including Austria, Netherlands, and the Czech Republic in early 2009. It was released in Germany in February 2009 with a QWERTZ keyboard and in France in March 2009 with an AZERTY keyboard. On 10 March 2009, it became available in Poland as Era G1 under a local mobile brand affiliated with T-Mobile. As of 2008, in the US, it was priced starting at $129.99 for new and existing T-Mobile customers if purchased with a two-year T-Mobile voice and data plan, and $399 without a contract. Congruent with claims made by T-Mobile representatives, the handset does need the data plan to fully function as a smartphone, but can be used as a regular phone (with some smartphone capabilities available when connected to a WiFi network) without a data plan. The Dream comes in black, bronze (formerly called "brown"; except in the UK), or white. On 23 April 2009, T-Mobile USA announced it had sold one million G1s since the device's launch. On 5 February 2009, the phone was released through Optus in Australia, as the HTC Dream. On 21 February 2009, Singapore became the first country in Asia to introduce the phone. It was sold by SingTel between $38 – $238 under various contracts.  Telefónica also launched a version of the phone in Spain on 20 April 2009 with slightly modified control buttons. On June 2, 2009 it was released through Rogers Wireless in Canada as the HTC Dream. This variant, DREA210, supports the UMTS 850 / 1900 bands and HSDPA up to 7.2&#160;Mbit/s for use on Rogers' 3G network. On July 27, 2010 the T-Mobile G1 was officially discontinued. The HTC Dream runs the Android Operating System. Most of the code is open source with some exceptions. Several applications that come installed with this device are: In the United States, the carrier-subsidized firmware for the G1 also comes with an application for accessing the Amazon MP3 music store, which allows users to browse and legally purchase DRM-free songs; however, in developer firmwares this application is not included. More applications can be obtained through the Android Market application or directly through developers. Documents in Google Docs can be viewed, but not edited. However, spreadsheets in Google Docs (including the texts in them) can be edited. The Dream firmware can be updated by flashing from an image stored on the microSD card as an update.zip or with a custom recovery as any name. These images are cryptographically signed by either the phone manufacturer or network carrier. Along with other features, support for widgets were introduced through updates. As of Friday, December 18, 2009, HTC and Rogers Wireless have both stated that they will not support Non-Google branded HTC Magic and HTC Dream phones past Android Version 1.5. HTC changed the content of its website to reflect this (Magic), (Dream), and Rogers Wireless notified the Android community by a post in AndroidForums. On December 5, 2008, Google announced the Android Dev Phone 1, a hardware unlocked version of the HTC Dream. With this version, the user is not only able to use any GSM/UMTS carrier, but also has complete superuser access to the device which is not found in the retail version. The advantages to this version is that it gives full access to the internal files of the phone, in particular changing and re-flashing the bootloader and operating system. This version also has pre-installed utilities to aid in the development of Android apps. This version is sold for US$399 and is only available to registered members of the Android community which is open to all developers for a US$25 fee. Depending on the country, the additional shipping charges (which include tariff and tax) may amount to a substantial fraction of the base price; for example, shipping charges to United Kingdom are $128.25, to Germany are US$134.31 and to Poland is US$162. Upon the launch of the T-Mobile G1, one concern among developers was that the retail build of Android installed on it lacked certain features (such as the "su" command) that were available on the Developer Phone version that allowed you to obtain superuser access to the phone. This had a number of implications, the most important being that it prevented you from changing large parts of the firmware (since they were mounted read-only on boot, and only the superuser could remount them read-write). However, a severe vulnerability was soon discovered in early versions of the firmware — everything typed into the phone's keyboard was being interpreted as commands in a root shell. By using telnetd to exploit this, users could flash a modified image with root access. This process, dubbed "rooting" by the community, allows users to gain superuser access and perform actions previously impossible without root access, such as installing custom builds of Android, running Debian, installing custom themes, and enabling ad-hoc Wi-Fi tethering. Although Google and T-Mobile were quick to patch this vulnerability with update RC30, a ROM from HTC was later leaked allowing users to downgrade to an older firmware with the bug. The Android Dev Phone 1 comes with superuser access officially integrated into its firmware, allowing native code and custom kernels to be run without any special hacks. Rooting also allows the use of modified images to run on the G1 through the original vulnerability. For example, a leaked HTC Magic (Android 1.5) OS was modified to run on the device before the official Android 1.5 build for the HTC Dream was released. This enabled functionality such as video recording, stereo Bluetooth and an on-screen keyboard. One popular unofficial firmware release for the Dream/G1 is CyanogenMod which is at version 6.1. (CyanogenMod is at version 7 as of 9-24-2011, but the Dream can only use up to version 6.1.) It is almost a full port of Android 2.2.1 to the Dream/G1. Following the disclosure of a root exploit, Jay Freeman released details of how to run Android and ARM Debian Linux together on the Dream.