 There are many types of business entity defined in the legal systems of various countries. These include corporations, cooperatives, partnerships, sole traders, limited liability company and other specialized types of organization. Some of these types are listed below, by country. For guidance, approximate equivalents in the company law of English-speaking countries are given in most cases, e.g. ≈ plc (UK), ≈ Ltd. (UK), ≈ limited partnership, etc. It should be remembered, however, that the regulations governing particular types of entity, even those described as roughly equivalent, may differ to a greater or lesser extent between countries. Depending on which type of business entity you choose will also influence the legal structure. The legal structure will also be influenced by the type of business entity you choose. See also help.gv.at (Austrian government site, in German) Dutch, French or German names may be used. In Canada entities can be incorporated under either federal or provincial (or territorial) law. Unlimited liability corporations can be formed in Alberta "AULC" and Nova Scotia "NSULC". The word or expression “Limited”, Limitée, “Incorporated”, Incorporée, “Corporation” or Société par actions de régime fédéral or the corresponding abbreviation “Ltd.”, Ltée, “Inc.”, “Corp.” or S.A.R.F. forms part of the name of every entity incorporated under the Canada Business Corporations Act (R.S., 1985, c. C-44). ≈ Ltd. or Plc (UK) As an exception, entities registered prior to 1985 may continue to be designated Société commerciale canadienne or by the abbreviation S.C.C. Under the Canada Cooperatives Act (1998, c. 1), a co-operative must have the word “cooperative”, “co-operative”, “coop”, “co-op”, coopérative, “united” or “pool”, or another grammatical form of any of those words, as part of its name. See below for Hong Kong. An SE or SCE may be created by registration in any of the EU/EEA Member States, and is subject to the European Company Statute. It may relocate its registered office to any other EU/EEA Member State with minimal formalities. The abbreviations are usually in Finnish, but Swedish names may also be used either as is or in combination with Finnish, e.g. Oy Yritys Ab. In addition to native types, European Union types are implemented: Of these, only nyrt., zrt., the formerly used rt., and kft. have legal personality. Similar to United Kingdom below, though without the class Community Interest Company. There were two forms of Company Limited by Guarantee, but only the form without a share capital is now used. Irish names may also be used, such as cpt (cuideachta phoibli theoranta) for plc, and Teo (Teoranta) for Ltd. Business corporations are referred to as kaisha (会社) and are formed under the Companies Law of 2005. There are currently (2010) 5 types and each of them has legal personality: Partnerships are referred to as 'kumiai' (組合). Each of these 4 types has no legal personality though other corporations, which include 'kumiai' ("組合") in their name, have: Corporations formed by the Professionals under the statutes governing them and their qualifications. These corporations can NOT gain limited liability except for the audit corporation: Corporations formed as Non-Profit Organization: Corporations formed under other statutes are as follows: Types of Public Government Service Groups Types of public corporations include: Business entities according to the "Ley General de Sociedades Mercantiles" (General Law of Business entities) Note: Any of these entities can be incorporated as a "Capital Variable" entity, in which case has to add the " de C.V." sufix to its company name. Example: "S.A. de C.V.", "S. de R.L. de C.V." Business entities according to the "Ley del Mercado de Valores" (Stock Market Law) Companies are registered on the Companies Register and with a regional Chamber of Commerce. Older forms (now rarely used) References: (Polish) Commercial Companies Code of 15 September 2000 (Dz.U. No 94 item 1037 as amended); (Polish) Civil Code of 23 April 1964 (Dz.U. No 16 item 93 as amended); (Polish) Law on Cooperatives of 16 September 1982 (Dz.U. 2003 No 188 item 1848 as amended) || Notes |- ||AG (Aktiengesellschaft)||SA (Société anonyme)||SA (Società anonima)|| ≈ plc (UK) or Inc. (US). Min. share capital CHF 100,000. Bearer or registered shares, of a par value of min. CHF 0.01 each. Details of shareholders generally not publicly available (except for main shareholders and management shares of publicly listed companies). |- ||GmbH (Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung)||Sàrl (Société à responsabilité limitée)||Sagl (Società a garanzia limitata)|| ≈ Ltd. (UK), LLC (US). Min. capital CHF 20,000. Registered shares only, of a par value of min. CHF 100 each. Name, address and share of each owner (and any changes) publicly recorded in the Official Register of Commerce &lt;http://zefix.admin.ch/&gt;. |} Company formation is regulated by the Ukrainian Civil Code and Commercial Code, Law of Commercial companies, Law of stock companies,law and order. In the United States, the individual states incorporate most businesses. Very few special types are incorporated by the federal government. For federal tax purposes, the Internal Revenue Service has separate entity classification rules. Under the rules, an entity may be classified as a corporation, a partnership or disregarded entity. As a corporation, it may be further classified as either an S corporation or a C corporation. Many federal governmental units are specially formed public corporations, while some private organizations have received a charter from Congress. The following are the main business designations and types (corporations and non-corporations): 
Required designations for corporations, by U.S. state, territory or commonwealth: Chapter 351 Section 351.110 Missouri Revised Statutes