Captain 3rd Rank Valery Mikhailovich Sablin (Russian: Валерий Михайлович Саблин, Valerij Michajlovič Sablin) (1 January 1939&#160;– 3 August 1976) was a Soviet Navy officer and a member of the Communist Party. In November 1975, he led a mutiny on the Soviet warship the Storozhevoy (Russian: Сторожевой, Storoževoj, meaning "Vigilant") in the hope of starting a Leninist political revolution in the Soviet Union. His mutiny failed and he was shot for treason nine months later. Sablin was born in 1939, the son of a Navy officer. He graduated from the Frunze Naval Institute in Leningrad in 1960 and served in the Soviet Northern Fleet. In 1973, he graduated from the Lenin Political Military Academy and was appointed a political officer. On 7 November 1975, Captain 3rd Rank Valery Sablin seized the Storozhevoy, a Soviet Burevestnik Class missile frigate, and confined the ship's captain and other officers to the wardroom. Sablin's plan was to take the ship from the Gulf of Riga north into the Gulf of Finland and to Leningrad, through the Neva River, moor by the decommissioned cruiser Aurora, a symbol of the Russian revolution, from where he would, by radio and television, protest against the rampant corruption of the Brezhnev era. In that address, he was going to say what many were saying privately: the revolution and motherland were in danger; the ruling authorities were up to their necks in corruption, demagoguery, graft, and lies, leading the country into an abyss; the lofty ideals of Communism had been discarded, and there was a pressing need to revive the Leninist principles of justice (Sablin was a strong believer in Leninist values and considered the Soviet system to essentially have "sold out"). However a junior officer escaped from confinement and radioed for assistance. When the Storozhevoy cleared the mouth of the Gulf of Riga, she did so with 10 bomber and reconnaissance airplanes and thirteen warships in pursuit. Sablin surrendered after several bombs were dropped in front of and behind the ship. He was arrested and, in May 1976, tried before a military court. Sablin was found guilty of "treason to the Motherland." Although this crime usually carried a 15-year prison sentence, he was executed on 3 August 1976. His second in command during the mutiny, Alexander Shein, received an eight-year prison sentence. All of the other mutineers were freed. In 1994, the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court reviewed the sentences with a possibility of Posthumous rehabilitation. The court partially rehabilitated Sablin rather than fully exonorating him and his comrade Seaman Shein (who had by that time served his sentence). The Kremlin did not want news of the uprising to spread and were therefore willing, perhaps even prepared, to present it to world public opinion as an attempted defection to the West—something that could not be further from the truth. The Gulf of Riga is impassable to the north, closed off by the Estonian islands of Saaremaa and Hiiumaa. A ship making for Leningrad from Riga needs to initially head west towards the Swedish island of Gotland, then steer northwest towards Stockholm, and then finally turn east and head into the Gulf of Finland and then to the port of Leningrad. This course gave the mistaken impression that the Storozhevoy was heading to Sweden instead of Leningrad. Until the end of the Cold War western intelligence believed that the crew was going to defect. American author Tom Clancy was inspired by the event to write the 1984 novel The Hunt for Red October (later made into a 1990 film starring Sean Connery). - Valery Sablin's last letter to his son before his execution. - Valery Sablin's farewell letter to his parents.