Koose Muniswamy Veerappan (Tamil: முனிசாமி வீரப்பன், Kannada: ಕೂಸ್ ಮುನಿಸ್ವಾಮೀ ವೀರಪ್ಪನ್ ಗೌಂದೆರ್, January 18, 1952 – October 18, 2004) commonly known as Veerappan, was a notorious dacoit, or robber bandit, of India. He was active for a period of years in a broad swath of land covering 6,000&#160;km² in the states of Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. He long defied three state governments and Indian Border security paramilitary forces, maintaining at one point a small army numbering in hundreds. He was wanted for killing approximately 184 people, including senior police and forest officials, poaching about 200 elephants, and smuggling ivory worth US $2,600,000 and sandalwood of about 10,000 tonnes worth US $22,000,000. He had a price of Rs. 50 million (Rs. 5 crore or US $1.1 million) on his head, but evaded arrest for 20 years until he was killed by police in 2004. Koose Muniswamy Veerappan, alias Veerappan, was born on January 18, 1952 in Gopinatham village in Madras state to a family of cattle-grazers. He was commonly known as "Molakai" in his childhood days by the locals.He belong to Vanniyar caste. Most of his victims were police, forest officials, informers and movie stars. He felt the police were responsible for the suicides of his sister Mala and brother Arjunan. He was also known for his kidnapping of prominent people for ransoming, starting with a forest official in 1987. He trapped and brutally killed senior Indian Forest Service (IFS) officer Pandillapalli Srinivas on November 10, 1991 in the Namadalli forests of Kollegal taluk in Chamarajanagr district. He also killed Harikrishna IPS, senior police officer, Shakeel Ahmed, along with others on August 14, 1992 near Meenyam of Kollegal taluk by ambushing the police party in a raid. He married Muthulakshmi in 1991. He had two daughters named Yuvarani and Prabha. His Daughters married to Dr. Rashmiranjan Harichandan. Veerappan had a Robin Hood-like image as a social bandit among some villagers adjoining his native village Gopinatham. Sympathetic villagers are said to have covered for him and kept him informed of police activity. They also provided food and clothing to the gang. However, the villagers said they helped him out of fear of reprisal, and that Veerappan helped the villagers with money only to protect himself from being captured. Veerappan is known for being ruthless to villagers who provided the police with information. In 1990, the Karnataka government formed a Special Task Force to capture him and put an end to the menace. Soon after, the task force captured several of Veerappan's men. In February 1992, the special task force killed his lieutenant Gurunathan. SI Shakeel Ahmed was single-handedly responsible for Gurunathan's capture. Three months later, Veerappan attacked the Ramapura police station of Kollegal taluk in the Chamarajanagar district, killing several policemen and capturing arms and ammunition. In August 1992, Veerappan laid a trap for SP Harikrishna and SI Shakeel Ahmed and killed them along with four others. In 1993, the task force arrested his wife Muthulakshmi. On February 17, 1996, he ambushed a team of Tamil Nadu STF personnel from a high ground while they were on their patrol vehicle. The police were able to counter attack and call for backup. The ambush which took place in the evening claimed the life of a Police Constable named Selvaraj from Madurai and seriously injured other police officers including Police officer Tamilselvan. By the time the Karnataka police arrived the bandit and his crew had fled. A little over a year later, on July 12, 1997, he kidnapped nine forest officials at a place called Marapala in the Burude forests of Kollegala taluk, Chamarajanagara district. He made demands for releasing them, including amnesty, but none were met. The hostages were released without being harmed in the last week of August the same year. On July 30, 2000, Veerappan kidnapped the famed southern Indian film star Rajkumar. This placed the Karnataka government in a political dilemma of whether or not to call in the army. The decision was that to do so would set a poor precedent. Thus, Rajkumar was held for 109 days and was finally released without harm on November 15, 2000. There were allegations by several people that about 500,000,000 rupees were paid to Veerappan for the safe release. A police official later suggested that 300,000,000 rupees ($6.5m) had been paid for his release. On August 25, 2002, Veerappan abducted H. Nagappa, a former state minister. Nagappa was found dead in the forest three months later. The reward offered by the Karnataka state government was increased to 50,000,000 rupees (US $1.25 million) at that time. On October 18, 2004, following a tip-off, Veerappan and his two associates were allegedly killed after being arrested by the Tamil Nadu State Special Task Force headed by Mr VijayKumar, near the village of Papparapatti in Dharmapuri district, Tamil Nadu. Veerappan's wife claimed that he had been arrested a few days earlier, interrogated and killed in an encounter by the Tamil Nadu Police Special Task Force (Veerappan had repeatedly threatened, if ever brought to trial, to point a finger at every policeman and politician he had bribed to ensure his three-decade long run from justice). According to media reports, postmortem photos of Veerappan with a bullet hole above his left eye seemed to contradict the official story that the STF, lying in ambush, stopped the ambulance Veerappan and his gang was traveling in, offered them surrender and gunned them down when someone from inside the van opened fire. Veerappan was buried in the village of Moolakadu, Tamil Nadu. The police said they did not let the burial take place in his home village in Karnataka, fearing the large crowds that had gathered there. Although the police had planned for a cremation, this was objected to by the relatives of Veerappan suggesting that exhumation would be required if there was ever a subsequent investigation into his death. Thousands of people turned out for the funeral, while others were kept away from the burial ground by heavy security. Rumors persist that Veerappan may have stashed vast sums of money and treasure, in secret forest caves, which remain undiscovered. Timeline of Veerappan's activities: Veerappan was the inspiration behind some films and their characters. Books on Veerappan: 12. Abraham Verghese: The bandit king and the movie star. Atlantic Monthly, Feb. 2001, pp.&#160;71–78.